Mitigating Bank risk management
While buying shares or playing a betting game, we all might have used or heard the word…. RISK!!! Now, what does the word risk mean… it’s a fear of losing something of value, many times in monetary terms. The same saying goes for any financial institution. Bank operates in a dynamic business environment and faces multiple risks. With risk, comes the concept of risk management. Risk management refers to the identification and assessment of potential risk and the development and execution of plans to deal with such risks. In the banking industry, risk management focuses on managing the bank’s exposure to losses or risk and to protect the value of its assets, revenue, operations, business, and reputation. To understand the future of Bank risk management, let us quickly go through the major banking risk one by one – Now how the future of the Bank Risk Management will look like – Banking risk management will undergo a major change from what it looks now, as there will be new challenges for the business. Customers want real-time service and update, which will require huge investments in technology and Artificial intelligence. There would be pressure on banks to provide real-time services with a reduced cost (affecting bank margins). With the financial crises day on day, new regulatory norms are introduced, maintaining a strict check on liquidity and capital adequacy. The bank needs to invest in proper IT infrastructure which is not only reliable but also flexible. Upcoming Fintech startups will also add on to the strategic risk of the banks. Not to forget the Cyber risk which will become one of the top risks for banks in the coming decade. To cope with the above risks, banks need to put more robust and reliable risk management in place. By the end of this decade, or even earlier, the active approach of the financial institutions in handling the risk functions will determine its success or failure. They need a have proactive approach in identifying, assessing and mitigating risk through better IT infrastructure, machine intelligence, better resources allocation/mapping, real-time analytics, and internal control frameworks. However, one can bet that the future will belong to those who will have a go-ahead approach in identifying, assessing and putting effective risk minimization plan to actions.