How big data and analytics is shaping tomorrow for marketing leaders?
Of the many similarities between Big Data and a Marketer, one thing stands out: both have an insatiable appetite for information.  If you don’t know what is broken, you won’t be able to fix it. In an era where the cliché “Change is the only constant” is relevant more than ever, people are looking at Big Data and Analytics to make their decisions more data-driven. Big Data is evolving into a necessity for the business not just to analyze and predict future outcomes but also to create and shape them. It is slowly becoming the oxygen for a company and the company’s survival, in the long run, might depend on its effectiveness in using big data. Humans are not the best at expressing their needs. Some human needs are so latent that people don’t even realize their existence. Thankfully, we no longer have to rely only on questionnaires and interviews for data collection. Collecting customers’ preferences through their online behavioral pattern and analyzing them can provide much better results. This can be used to take the level of customization a customer experiences to a whole new level. Big Data provides insights into the decision journey of an individual before buying a product. The marketing team can identify the key features in the product that attract the customers. It is also indispensable in understanding the local markets and helps in coming up with marketing strategies at regional levels.  Customers nowadays don’t want products pushed to them and would rather prefer buying stuff at their convenience. Thus, it has become necessary that a high degree of customization and accuracy is required while marketing products to customers. Whether a person is your customer or not may depend on that first product you recommend to him. Equally important is the appropriate pricing of the product. Big Data analytics can help in determining the ideal price of the product. It can also provide insights into the possibility of differentiated pricing of products based on the customer’s willingness to pay. Big Data can be used to leverage the Next Best Alternative (NBA) marketing approach. This is a customer-centric approach wherein unique, real-time promotional offers for a customer are considered and the optimal one is determined. This is radically different from the traditional approach of creating offers for the product first and then attempting to prospect. Big Data and Analytics can also help in brand management by analyzing customer reviews/comments over a period of time. This is one of the best ways to identify customer’s expectation from the product. The reason for any sharp change in the level of overall satisfaction must be analyzed. Tangentially, it can also be used to identify new potential markets and facilitate product diversification. Forrester reveals that big data and analytics are being used by 44% of B2C marketers to improve responsiveness and that 36% actively use analytics and data mining for better forecasting. Given how young the field of big data is, these are astounding figures. Data, which were once qualitative (Weight – Slim, Fit, Fat) have become quantitative (kgs, lbs) with the advancement in technology (the invention of the weighing machine). We are in a similar transitional phase in the way we market and sell goods. Analytics provides ways of quantifying marketing decision, which can come in handy while recording, organizing, justifying and learning from our previous decisions. Some of the ways in which we can augment our marketing decisions with analytics are listed below.   Fig 2. Hurdles inaccurate sales forecasting  Source: CIO Insights Predictive analytics has also brought about disruption in the job market. Analytical skills and tools are becoming necessary to run a business and hence the marketing team must be equipped with knowledge of the same. In view of these changes, here are a few things that marketing leaders can do to build a big data and analytics centric marketing team: The best thing about Data Analytics is that it is helpful for organizations of all scales. For most smaller organizations, investment in predictive analytics holds the key for rapid expansion. Large, established organizations also use analytics to understand trends in the market. Though several technologies have sprung up in the past before becoming irrelevant, predictive analytics doesn’t seem like yet another one of those. Judging by how essential it has become to all scales of business, predictive analytics is here to stay for a very long time! Investing in them and building an organization centered around analytics would be a wise decision.